---
title : Day 6 - Unsupervised Learning 
author : Govind Gopakumar
institute : IIT Kanpur
theme : metropolis
---

[Lecture slides in pdf form](lec6.pdf)

# Prelude

## Announcements 

- Project Groups : Code should be up and running, you should have some idea of what your project
 is and what the end goals are.
- Quiz 1 is up : Auto graded, feedback. Ask if you have doubts
- Programming assignment 1 is up : Gradient descent

## Story so far

### Supervised Learning
- KNN, Distance from means
- Decision Trees, Random Forests
- Logistic Regression, Perceptron
- Linear Regression

### Techniques
- Gradient Descent
- Formulating a loss function
- Using "maximum probability" to obtain results

# Clustering 

## Clustering - I
### Why do we need it?
- Discover patterns or "clusters"
- Preprocessing step for classification
- Allow us to learn "generative" models

### What's the easiest way to do it?
- Group objects together
- But how?

## Clustering - II

### Model overview
- K-Means clustering : defined by k points
- Each data point is assigned closest mean
- K is sort of a hyper parameter, not to be learnt!

### Training the model
- How do we find the means?
- How do we do assignment?
- What are the parameters to be learnt?

## Clustering - III

### Model parameters
- Known : Location of data
- Unknown : Cluster assignments, cluster means

### How to find both?
- Knowing cluster means let us find cluster assignments
- Knowing cluster assignments : does it help the other way around?

## Clustering - IV

### Alternating optimization
- Two different unknown parameters : $\mu, z$
- Idea from matrix factorization.

### Finding the parameters
- How do we do alternating optimization here?
- What are the guesses?
- What does it say about our "loss function"?

## Clustering - V

### Estimating the cluster IDs
- Iterate over all the means
- Assign cluster ID as the closest mean

### Estimating the cluster means
- Collect points belonging to specific cluster
- Compute mean of that cluster

## Clustering - VI
### Geometry of the model
- Decision surface?
- What sort of clusters does it learn?
- When will it do badly?

### Uniqueness of clustering
- What does final cluster depend on?
- Will it always learn good clustering?
- What's an example where it will fail?
- Outliers?

## Clustering - VII
### Comments about K-Means
- Makes hard assignments
- Size of clusters matters!
- Can work with transformations as well!

### Limitations
- Non-convexity of the "loss" function!
- Iterative solution
- Will have to work with better notions of "distance"!
- How do we choose k?

# Smarter Clustering
## Gaussian Mixture Models - I
### Why should we improve our clustering?
- Hard assignment
- Logistic Regression vs other methods!
- Probabilistic interpretation

### Generative modelling
- Model how the data was generated!
- Can be used to give new data!
- Preprocessing step for supervised learning?

## Gaussian Mixture Models - II
### Review of the Gaussian distribution
- p(X) : Reflects how probable a point is
- Density decreases as distance from mean increases
- Variance reflects spread

### Estimation of a Gaussian
- Given : A bunch of data points
- What is the most likely Gaussian?
- How do we find it?

## Gaussian Mixture Models - III
### Modelling assumptions
- Assume each point is "generated" from a Gaussian
- How many Gaussians?
- Where are they?

### Model overview
- What are the unknowns in the setting?
- How do we find them?

## Gaussian Mixture Models - IV

### Alternating optimization?
- Find cluster ID's in a probabilistic sense
- Find clusters also in the same fashion!

### What are the parameters then?
- $\mu$ for each Gaussian
- $\Sigma$ for each Gaussian
- Can we make intelligent choices here?

# Conclusion

## Concluding Remarks

### Takeaways
- How to cluster points for unsupervised learning
- How to do alternating optimization (2nd such example)
- Generative modelling and Gaussian Mixture models

### Announcements
- Assignment 1, Quiz 1 up. 
- (Hopefully programming tutorials also up)


## References

- [Lecture 10, CS 771 IIT Kanpur](https://cse.iitk.ac.in/users/piyush/courses/ml_autumn16/771A_lec10_slides.pdf)
- [Lecture 16, CS 771 IIT Kanpur](https://cse.iitk.ac.in/users/piyush/courses/ml_autumn16/771A_lec16_slides.pdf)
